workshop/content/docs/conclusion.md, before:

---
title: Conclusion
---

# Conclusion

We hope this workshop provided a valuable overview of the many features of pygeoapi. The project's
goal is enabling low barrier, simple and flexible data publishing, using the OGC API suite of standards.

[![pygeoapi logo](assets/images/pygeoapi-logo.png){ width=40% }](https://pygeoapi.io)

[![OGC APIs banner](assets/images/OGC_APIs_banner.jpg){ width=40% }](https://ogcapi.ogc.org)

# FOSS4G 2024

For those in attendance at [FOSS4G 2024](https://2024.foss4g.org):

- come to the [pygeoapi project status](https://talks.osgeo.org/foss4g-2024/talk/VQNTSA) presentation on Wednesday 04 December at 17:45, in room II
- or the other talks related to pygeoapi:
  - [Unifying Standards for Water Data Exchange: Leveraging OGC API - EDR and pygeoapi](https://talks.osgeo.org/foss4g-2024/talk/KRFWMJ) on Thursday 05 December at 15:00, in room III
  - [Rendering OGC API Compliant Vector Tiles on the Fly with pygeoapi + Elasticsearch](https://talks.osgeo.org/foss4g-2024/talk/ZLGZPA) on Friday 06 December at 12:00, in room I
  - [Wagtail CMS + pygeoapi = Modern SDI for the current needs ](https://talks.osgeo.org/foss4g-2024/talk/L9PB9K) on Friday 06 December at 12:30, in room I
- the pygeoapi team will be at the [Community Code Sprint](https://2024.foss4g.org/en/additional-events) on 07-08 December, at the IFPA Campus Belém

# Contributing

Suggestions, improvements and fixes are always welcome. Please visit our [community](https://pygeoapi.io/community)
page for more information on getting in touch.

Thank you for your interest in pygeoapi!

Commit message:

update for FOSS4G Europe 2025 (#201)
* #200 add team 2025 FOSS4G-EU

* update conclusion page for FOSS4G-EU 2025

---------

Co-authored-by: Just van den Broecke <just@justobjects.nl>

workshop/content/docs/conclusion.md, after:

---
title: Conclusion
---

# Conclusion

We hope this workshop provided a valuable overview of the many features of pygeoapi. The project's
goal is enabling low barrier, simple and flexible data publishing, using the OGC API suite of standards.

[![pygeoapi logo](assets/images/pygeoapi-logo.png){ width=40% }](https://pygeoapi.io)

[![OGC APIs banner](assets/images/OGC_APIs_banner.jpg){ width=40% }](https://ogcapi.ogc.org)

# FOSS4G Europe 2025

For those in attendance at [FOSS4G Europe 2025](https://2025.europe.foss4g.org):

- come to the [pygeoapi project status](https://talks.osgeo.org/foss4g-europe-2025/talk/EPWGP7) presentation on Wednesday 16 July 17:45, in room EL11 (Geosolutions)
- or the other talks related to pygeoapi:
- the pygeoapi team will be at the [Community Sprint](https://2025.europe.foss4g.org/schedule/community-sprint/) on 19-20 July, at the conference venue, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences (building P)

# Contributing

Suggestions, improvements and fixes are always welcome. Please visit our [community](https://pygeoapi.io/community)
page for more information on getting in touch.

Thank you for your interest in pygeoapi!
